CS111 Project 0: Warm-Up

NAME: Natasha Sarkar
EMAIL: nat41575@gmail.com
ID: 904743795

README

Files Included in Submission lab0-904743795.tar.gz:

lab0.c

A C source file that is compiled into the lab0 program when make is
run. It copies standardinput to standard output. It supports the
following options:

--input=filename ... use the specified file as standard input

--output=filename ... use the specified file as standard output 
(creates the file if it is not present, overwrites otherwise)

--segfault ... forces a segmentation fault

--catch ... registers a SIGSEGV handler that catches the segmentation
fault and logs an error message


Makefile

Supports the following targets:

default ... build the lab0 executable (with -Wall and -Wextra options)

check ... runs the checkscript.sh script to run a few quick tests of 
the program

clean ... deletes all files created by the Makefile

dist ... builds the distribution tarball


checkscript.sh

A bash script that is run when the make check command is run. Runs a
few quick tests to determine that the program is working properly. 

The checks were:

1) Ran the program with an input file (included in the 
distrubtion file), create an output file, and see that the program
exited with an exit code of 0.

2) Compared that the input file and the output file had the
same content after the program was run.

3) Ensured that the correct error is thrown when unable to write
to the output file by creating an output file, removing its
write permissions, and then attempting to run the program with that
file as the output file.

4) Check that the segfault handler works by running with both
--segfault and --catch options.

5) Attempt to run the program with an input file that doesn't exist
to check that the correct error is thrown when attempting to open
the file.


file1

A file used as test input for checkscript.sh.


backtrace.png

Screenshot of a segmentation fault and associated stack-trace


breakpoint.png

Screenshot of a breakpoint and variable inspection

